Added vaccination signals to the documentation (#851)
cmu-delphi/delphi-epidata: docs/api/covidcast-signals/dsew-cpr.md

The Community Profile Report (CPR) is published by the Data Strategy and Execution Workgroup (DSEW) of the White House COVID-19 Team. For more information, see the [official description and data dictionary at healthdata.gov](https://healthdata.gov/Health/COVID-19-Community-Profile-Report/gqxm-d9w9) for "COVID-19 Community Profile Report".

> This data source provides various COVID-19 related metrics, of which we report hospital admissions and vaccinations. For hospital admissions, other sources of data in COVIDcast include [HHS](hhs.md) and [medical insurance claims](hospital-admissions.md).  The CPR differs from these sources in that it is part of the public health surveillance stream (like HHS, unlike claims) but is available at a daily-county level (like claims, unlike HHS). CPR hospital admissions figures at the state level and above are meant to match those from HHS, but are known to differ. See the Limitations section for details. For vaccinations, we have no other sources of data currently.

Author: Do we not want the line explicitly about no vaccinations, "For vaccinations, we have no other sources of data currently." Otherwise looks good!

> This data source provides various COVID-19 related metrics, of which we report hospital admissions and vaccinations. For hospital admissions, other sources of data in COVIDcast include [HHS](hhs.md) and [medical insurance claims](hospital-admissions.md).  The CPR differs from these sources in that it is part of the public health surveillance stream (like HHS, unlike claims) but is available at a daily-county level (like claims, unlike HHS). CPR hospital admissions figures at the state level and above are meant to match those from HHS, but are known to differ. See the Limitations section for details. For vaccinations, we have no other sources of data currently.

Reviewer: We do not -- the assumption is for uniqueness, so we only mention if there's overlap.

County, MSA, state, and HHS-level values are pulled directly from CPR when available; nation-level values are aggregated up from the state level.

| Signal | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `confirmed_admissions_covid_1d_7dav` | Number of adult and pediatric confirmed COVID-19 hospital admissions occurring each day. Smoothed using a 7-day average.  <br/> **Earliest date available:** 2019-12-16 for state, HHS, and nation; 2021-01-06 for MSA and county |
| `confirmed_admissions_covid_1d_prop_7dav` | Number of adult and pediatric confirmed COVID-19 hospital admissions occurring each day, per 100,000 population. Smoothed using a 7-day average. <br/> **Earliest date available:** 2019-12-16 for state, HHS, and nation; 2021-01-06 for MSA and county |

> | `people_full_vaccinated` | 'People fully vaccinated includes those who have received two doses of the Pfizer-BioNTech or Moderna vaccine and those who have received one dose of the J&J/Janssen vaccine' - from the CPR data dictionary.  <br/> **Earliest date available:** 2021-01-15 at any geo level except CBSA and 2021-04-01 at the CBSA level.|

Reviewer: See https://cmu-delphi.github.io/delphi-epidata/api/covidcast_geography.html for a listing of accepted geo level vocabulary

```suggestion
| `people_full_vaccinated` | "People fully vaccinated includes those who have received two doses of the Pfizer-BioNTech or Moderna vaccine and those who have received one dose of the J&J/Janssen vaccine" - from the CPR data dictionary.  <br/> **Earliest date available:** 2021-01-15 at any geo level except MSA and 2021-04-01 at the MSA level.|
```

> | `people_booster_doses` |'The count of people who received a booster dose includes anyone who is fully vaccinated and has received another dose of COVID-19 vaccine since 2021-08-13. This includes people who received booster doses and people who received additional doses.' from the CPR data dictionary <br/> **Earliest date available:** 2021-11-01 for state, HHS, and nation. Not available below state level |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `people_booster_doses` |"The count of people who received a booster dose includes anyone who is fully vaccinated and has received another dose of COVID-19 vaccine since 2021-08-13. This includes people who received booster doses and people who received additional doses." - from the CPR data dictionary. <br/> **Earliest date available:** 2021-11-01 for state, HHS, and nation. Not available below state level. |
```

> | `doses_admin_7dav` | 'Doses administered shown by date of report, not date of administration. ... submitting entities will have the ability to update or delete previously submitted records using new functionality available in CDC’s Data Clearinghouse. Use of this new functionality may result in fluctuations across metrics as historical data are updated or deleted' - from the CPR data dictionary.  Smoothed using a 7-day average. <br/> **Earliest date available:** 2021-04-29 for state, HHS, and nation. Not available below state level|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `doses_admin_7dav` | "Doses administered shown by date of report, not date of administration. ... [S]ubmitting entities will have the ability to update or delete previously submitted records using new functionality available in CDC’s Data Clearinghouse. Use of this new functionality may result in fluctuations across metrics as historical data are updated or deleted" - from the CPR data dictionary.  Smoothed using a 7-day average. <br/> **Earliest date available:** 2021-04-29 for state, HHS, and nation. Not available below state level. |
```

> | `booster doses_admin_7dav` | "Doses administered shown by date of report, not date of administration. ... submitting entities will have the ability to update or delete previously submitted records using new functionality available in CDC’s Data Clearinghouse. Use of this new functionality may result in fluctuations across metrics as historical data are updated or deleted' - from the CPR data dictionary. [A] booster dose includes anyone who is fully vaccinated and has received another dose of COVID-19 vaccine since August 13, 2021. This includes people who received booster doses and people who received additional doses." - from the CPR data dictionary. Smoothed using a 7-day average.<br/> **Earliest date available:** 2021-11-01 for state, HHS, and nation. Not available below state level |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `booster_doses_admin_7dav` | "Doses administered shown by date of report, not date of administration. ... [S]ubmitting entities will have the ability to update or delete previously submitted records using new functionality available in CDC’s Data Clearinghouse. Use of this new functionality may result in fluctuations across metrics as historical data are updated or deleted" - from the CPR data dictionary. "[A] booster dose includes anyone who is fully vaccinated and has received another dose of COVID-19 vaccine since August 13, 2021. This includes people who received booster doses and people who received additional doses." - from the CPR data dictionary. Smoothed using a 7-day average.<br/> **Earliest date available:** 2021-11-01 for state, HHS, and nation. Not available below state level. |
```

For counts-based fields like hospital admissions, CPR reports rolling sums for the preceding 7 days. The 7-day average signals are computed by Delphi by dividing each sum by 7 and assigning it to the last date in the included range, so e.g. the signal for June 7 is the average of the underlying data for June 1 through 7, inclusive.

The `confirmed_admissions_covid_1d_7dav` signal mirrors the `Confirmed COVID-19 admissions - last 7 days` CPR field for all geographic resolutions except nation. Nation-level admissions is calculated by summing state-level values. 

> The same holds for `doses_admin_7dav` and `booster doses_admin_7dav` mirroring `Doses administered - last 7 days` and `Booster doses administered - last 7 days`. Nation-level doses are calculated by summing state-level values.

Reviewer: (this is an instance where repeated language enhances clarity)

```suggestion
The `doses_admin_7dav` and `booster doses_admin_7dav` signals mirror the `Doses administered - last 7 days` and `Booster doses administered - last 7 days` CPR fields for all geographic resolutions except nation. Nation-level doses are calculated by summing state-level values.
```

## Limitations

Nation-level estimates may be inaccurate since aggregations are done using state-level smoothed values instead of raw values. Ideally we would aggregate raw values before smoothing, but the raw values are not accessible in this case.

Because DSEW does not provide updates on weekends, estimates are not available for all dates.

> Currently, of all the vaccination signals, county-level data is only available for `people_full_vaccinated`. Until 2021-11-15, there were unallocated vaccinated people reported for different states, which are noted by '000' at the end of the FIPs code in the county level. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, of all the vaccination signals, county-level data is only available for `people_full_vaccinated`. Until 2021-11-15, several states reported vaccinated people not allocated to any individual county. These unallocated counts were reported using a FIPS code ending with `000` for that state, which is never a FIPS code for a real county.
```

> There are many high-visibility data notes from the CPR spreadsheets that explain corrections like decresases in cumulative values for state/HHS/national counts. For example 'On 02/09/2022, SC issued corrections to their vaccination data, resulting in negative values for those initiating vaccination ages 65+.' These can be accessed through the first tab on downloaded CPR worksheets from relevant date ranges (if available)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This data source is susceptible to large corrections that can create strange data effects such as negative counts and sudden changes of 1M+ counts from one day to the next. Many of these corrections are documented in the "High-Visibility Data Notes" section in the first tab of the CPR spreadsheet for that day. To locate the correct spreadsheet for some `time_value` R, consult the following table:

| Signal type | CPR date |
| - | - |
| Test positivity | R+3, R+10 |
| Test volume | R+7, R+14 |
| Vaccinations | R |

```

Author: I'm not sure about R+2, can someone double verify this? Everything else sounds much better :)

Reviewer: Keep in mind that lag is not the same as the delta between the reference date and the CPR date. For example, the CPR for 20220218 was uploaded to healthdata.gov on 20220222; the CPR for 20220217 was uploaded on 20220218, etc. So lag _does_ need to account for no uploads on weekends.

For this table, we care only about the time delta between the date in the CPR filename and the reference date in the header for a particular signal type.

I've exhaustively checked and found ... not what I expected. Here's the table of deltas for hospital admissions. Each cell represents the fraction of files from 20201217 to 20220128 with the stated difference between the hospital admissions reference date and the date in the filename. It's not uniform, even accounting for day of week. 

| Day of week (reference date) | count | delta=1 | delta=2 |
| - | - | - | - |
| Mon | 51  | 0.0980392  | 0.901961 |
| Tue | 55  | 0.0909091  | 0.909091 |
| Wed | 40  | 0.1  | 0.9 |
| Thu | 9  | 0.444444  | 0.555556 |
| Fri | 24  | 0.25  | 0.75 |
| Sat | 56  | 0.107143  | 0.892857 |
| Sun | 52  | 0.0961538  | 0.903846 |

Not sure what we want to do here. Maybe "R+2 (usually) or R+1 (10% chance)"

Author: Could I see your code (just to calculate the same for vaccinations)? I think I'd need to do it separately for the cumulative signals and the doses administered signals if I understand correctly.

Reviewer: Sure thing:
```
# filename: demo.py
from delphi_dsew_community_profile.pull import *
from delphi_utils import read_params
import pandas as pd

for f in os.listdir("input_cache"):
    if not f.endswith(".xlsx"): continue
    publish_date = Dataset.parse_publish_date(f)
    workbook = pd.ExcelFile(os.path.join("input_cache",f))
    headers = pd.read_excel(
        workbook, sheet_name="States", header=None, nrows=1
    ).values.flatten().tolist()
    for h in headers:
        if Dataset.skip_overheader(h):
            continue
        dt = DatasetTimes.from_header(h, publish_date)
        if dt.hosp_reference_date is None:
            continue
        print(publish_date, dt.hosp_reference_date, dt.hosp_reference_date.strftime("%a"), (publish_date-dt.hosp_reference_date).days)
```

& then 
```
$ env/bin/python demo.py >demo.txt
$ awk '{print $3, $4}' demo.txt |sort |uniq -c |awk '{n+=$1; last=was; was=$1} NR%2==0 {print "| " $2, "| " n, " | " last/n, " | " was/n " |"; n=0}'
```

from an environment that has a populated `input_cache` directory. (sorry for the shell script, it was intended to be a one-off)

Author: For Cumulative Vaccinations: 

Day of week (reference date) | count | delta=1 | delta=2
-- | -- | -- | --
| Mon | 111  | 0.369369  | 0.630631 |
| Sun | 14  | 0.857143  | 0.142857 |
| Thu | 71  | 0.971831  | 0.028169 |
| Tue | 66  | 0.969697  | 0.030303 |
| Wed | 63  | 0.968254  | 0.031746 |

For Doses Administered: 

Day of week (reference date) | count | delta=1 | delta=2
-- | -- | -- | --
| Fri | 73  | 0.972603  | 0.0273973 |
| Fri | 4  | 0.5  | 0.5 |
| Mon | 98  | 0.0204082  | 0.979592 |
| Sun | 46  | 0.217391  | 0.782609 |
| Sun | 4  | 0.5  | 0.5 |
| Thu | 103  | 0.980583  | 0.0194175 |
| Tue | 92  | 0.978261  | 0.0217391 |
| Wed | 89  | 0.977528  | 0.0224719 |

So I'll change it to 1-2 days for vaccinations as well. 

Thanks Katie!

For counts-based fields like hospital admissions, CPR reports rolling sums for the preceding 7 days. The 7-day average signals are computed by Delphi by dividing each sum by 7 and assigning it to the last date in the included range, so e.g. the signal for June 7 is the average of the underlying data for June 1 through 7, inclusive.

The `confirmed_admissions_covid_1d_7dav` signal mirrors the `Confirmed COVID-19 admissions - last 7 days` CPR field for all geographic resolutions except nation. Nation-level admissions is calculated by summing state-level values. 

> The `doses_admin_7dav` and `booster doses_admin_7dav` signals mirror the `Doses administered - last 7 days` and `Booster doses administered - last 7 days` CPR fields for all geographic resolutions except nation. Nation-level doses are calculated by summing state-level values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `doses_admin_7dav` and `booster_doses_admin_7dav` signals mirror the `Doses administered - last 7 days` and `Booster doses administered - last 7 days` CPR fields for all geographic resolutions except nation. Nation-level doses are calculated by summing state-level values.
```

The report is currently updated daily, excluding weekends. However, this is subject to change; DSEW previously issued updates on a twice-weekly schedule. We check for updates daily.

> Most signals are reported with a lag of 1-2 days. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CPR is prepared with an internal lag of 1-2 days for most signals. The file is usually posted to healthdata.gov the day after the date listed in the filename, excluding weekends and federal holidays. This results in an effective lag in COVIDcast of 2-4 days, or 5 days when Monday is a holiday.
```
